doc/source/L6_krylov.rst, before:

.. default-role:: math

Iterative Krylov methods for `Ax=b`
===================================

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454126320>`_.

In the previous section we saw how iterative methods are necessary
(but can also be fast) for eigenvalue problems `Ax=\lambda x`.
Iterative methods can also be useful for solving linear systems
`Ax=b`, generating a sequence of vectors `x^k` that converge to the
solution. We shall examine Krylov subspace methods, where each
iteration mainly involves a matrix-vector multiplication. For dense
matrices, matrix-vector multiplication costs `\mathcal{O}(m^2)`, but
often (e.g. numerical solution of PDEs, graph problems, etc.)  `A` is
sparse (i.e. has zeros almost everywhere) and the matrix-vector
multiplication costs `\mathcal{O}(m)`. The goal is then to find a
method where only a few iterations are necessary before the error is
very small, so that the solver has total cost `\mathcal{O}(mN)` where
`N` is the total number of iterations, hopefully small.

Since we only need the result of a matrix-vector multiplication, it is
even possible to solve a linear system without storing `A`
explicitly. Instead one can just provide a subroutine that implements
matrix-vector multiplication in some way; this is called a
"matrix-free" implementation.

Krylov subspace methods
-----------------------

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454126582>`_.

In this section we will introduce Krylov subspace methods for solving
`Ax=b` (we will not specialise to real or symmetric matrices
here). The idea is to approximate the solution using the basis

.. math::

   (b, Ab, A^2b, A^3b, \ldots, A^kb)

whose span is called a Krylov subspace. After each iteration the
Krylov subspace grows by one dimension. As we have already seen from
studying power iteration, the later elements in this sequence will get
very parallel (they will all be approximating the eigenvector with
largest magnitude of eigenvalue). Hence, we once again need to resort
to orthogonalising the basis. We could simply take the QR
factorisation of this basis, but the Arnoldi iteration coming up
next also provides a neat way to solve the equation when projected
onto the Krylov subspace.

Arnoldi iteration
-----------------

The key to Krylov subspace methods turns out to be the transformation
of `A` to an upper Hessenberg matrix by orthogonal similarity
transforms, so that `A=QHQ^*`. We have already looked at using
Householder transformations to do this in the previous section.
The Householder technique is not so suitable for large dimensional
problems, so instead we look at a way of proceeding column by
column, just like the Gram-Schmidt method does for finding
`QR` factorisations.

We do this by rewriting `AQ=QH`. The idea is that at iteration `n` we
only look at the first `n` columns of `Q`, which we
call `\hat{Q}_n`. When `m` is large, this is a significant saving:
`mn \ll m^2`.
To execute the iteration, it turns out that
we should look at the `(n+1)\times n` upper left-hand section of `H`,
i.e.

   .. math::

      \tilde{H}_n = \begin{pmatrix}
      h_{11} & \ldots & h_{1n} \\
      h_{21} & \ddots & \vdots \\
      0 & \ddots & h_{nn} \\
      0 & 0 & h_{n+1,n} \\
      \end{pmatrix}

Then, `A\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n`.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454127181>`_.

Using the column space interpretation of matrix-matrix multiplication,
we see that the `n`-th column is

   .. math::

      Aq_n = h_{1n}q_1 + h_{2n}q_n + \ldots h_{n,n}q_n + h_{n+1,n}q_{n+1}.

This formula shows us how to construct the non-zero entries of the
nth column of `H`; this defines the Arnoldi algorithm which we
provide as pseudo-code below.

* `q_1\gets b/\|b\|`
* FOR `n=1,2,\ldots`

  * `v\gets Aq_n`
  * FOR `j=1` TO `n`

    * `h_{jn}\gets q_j^*v`
    * `v \gets v - h_{jn}q_j`
  * END FOR
  * `h_{n+1,n} \gets \|v\|`
  * `q_{n+1} \gets v/\|v\|`
* END FOR

.. proof:exercise::

   The :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.arnoldi` function has been left
   unimplemented. It should implement the Arnoldi algorithm using one
   loop over the iteration count, and return the `Q` and `H` matrices
   after the requested number of iterations is complete. The test
   script ``test_exercises10.py`` in the ``test`` directory will test
   this function.
  
If we were to form the QR factorisation of the `m\times n` Krylov
matrix

   .. math::

      K_n = \begin{pmatrix}
      b & Ab & \ldots & A^{n_1}b \\
      \end{pmatrix}

then we would get `Q=Q_n`. Importantly, in the Arnoldi iteration, we
never form `K_n` or `R_n` explicitly, since these are very
ill-conditioned and not useful numerically.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454136990>`_.
   
But what is the use of the `\tilde{H}_n` matrix? Applying
`\hat{Q}_n^*` to `A\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n` gives

   .. math::

      \hat{Q}_n^*A\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_n^*\hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n,

      = \begin{pmatrix}
      1 & 0 & \ldots & 0 & 0 \\
      0 & \ddots & \ddots & \vdots & \vdots \\
      \vdots & \ddots & \ddots & \vdots & \vdots \\
      0 & \ldots & \ldots & 1 & 0 \\ 
      \end{pmatrix}
      \tilde{H}_n
      = H_n,

where `H_n` is the `n\times n` top left-hand corner of `H`.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454171516>`_.

The intrepretation of this is that `H_n` is the orthogonal projection
of `A` onto the Krylov subspace `\mathrm{span}(K_n)`. To see this, take any vector `v`,
and project `Av` onto the the Krylov subspace `\mathrm{span}(K_n)`.

   .. math::

      PAv = \hat{Q}_n\hat{Q}_n^*v.

Then, changing basis to the orthogonal basis gives

   .. math::

      \hat{Q}_n^*(\hat{Q}_n\hat{Q}_n^*A)\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_n^*A\hat{Q}_n
      = H_n.

GMRES
-----

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454171559>`_.

The Generalised Minimum Residual method (GMRES), due to Saad (1986),
exploits these properties of the Arnoldi iteration. The idea is
that we build up the orthogonal basis for the Krylov subspaces
one by one, and at each iteration we solve the projection of
`Ax=b` onto the Krylov basis as a least squares problem, until
the residual `\|Ax-b\|` is below some desired tolerance.

To avoid the numerical instabilities that would come from using the
basis `(b,Ab,A^2b,\ldots)`, we use the Arnoldi iteration to build an
orthonormal basis, and seek approximate solutions of the form `x_n =
\hat{Q}_ny` for `y\in\mathbb{C}^n`. We then seek the value of `y`
that minimises the residual

   .. math::

      \mathcal{R}_n = \|AQ_ny - b\|.

This explains the Minimum Residual part of the name. We also see from
this definition that the residual cannot increase with iterations,
because it only increases the subspace where we seek a solution.

This problem can be simplified further by using `AQ_n = Q_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n`,
so

   .. math::

      \mathcal{R}_n = \|\hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n y - b\|.

Remembering that `b=\|b\|q_1`, we see that the entire residual is in
the column space of `\hat{Q}_{n+1}`, and hence we can invert
on the column space using `\hat{Q}_{n+1}^*` which does not change
the norm of the residual due to the orthonormality.

   .. math::

      \mathcal{R}_n = \|\tilde{H}_n y - \hat{Q}_{n+1}^*b\|
      = \|\tilde{H}_n y - e_1\|b\|\|.

Finding `y` to minimise `\mathcal{R}_n` requires the solution of a
least squares problem, which can be computed via QR factorisation
as we saw much earlier in the course.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454171921>`_.

We are now in position to present the GMRES algorithm as pseudo-code.

* `q_1 \gets b/\|b\|`
* FOR `n=1,2,\dots`

  * APPLY STEP `n` OF ARNOLDI
  * FIND `y` TO MINIMIZE `\|\tilde{H}_ny - \|b\|e_1\|`
  * `x_n \gets \hat{Q}_ny`
  * CHECK IF `\mathcal{R}_n <` TOL
* END FOR

.. proof:exercise::

   The :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.GMRES` function has been left
   unimplemented. It should implement the basic GMRES algorithm above,
   using one loop over the iteration count. You can paste code from
   your :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.arnoldi` implementation, and you
   should use your least squares code to solve the least squares
   problem.  The test script ``test_exercises10.py`` in the ``test``
   directory will test this function.

.. proof:exercise::

   The least squares problem in GMRES requires the QR factorisation of
   `H_k`. It is wasteful to rebuild this from scratch given that we
   just computed the QR factorisation of `H_{k-1}`. Modify your code
   so that it recycles the QR factorisation, applying just one extra
   Householder rotation per GMRES iteration. Don't forget to check
   that it still passes the test.

.. hint::

   Don't get confused by the two Q matrices involved in GMRES! There
   is the Q matrix for the Arnoldi iteration, and the Q matrix for
   the least squares problem. These are not the same.

.. proof:exercise::

   We can also make GMRES more efficient by exploiting the upper
   Hessenberg structure, since we only have one non-zero value below
   the diagonal in each column. Instead of using a Householder
   transformation, we can use a Givens rotation, which only alters
   two rows (the row corresponding to the diagonal, and the row
   below). The Givens rotation simply replaces these two rows
   (call them `r_k` and `r_{k+1}`) by

      .. math::

	 \hat{r}_k = \cos(\theta) r_k + \sin(\theta) r_{k+1},

	 \hat{r}_{k+1} = -\sin(\theta) r_k + \cos(\theta) r_{k+1}.

   where the angle `\theta` is chosen so that `\hat{r}_{k+1,k}=0`.
   This is cheaper, because we only update two rows, but still
   corresponds to a unitary transformation. (Note that a slightly more
   general formula is required for complex matrices, but the tests
   have been set up for real matrices only.) Modify your code so it
   uses Givens rotations to make it more efficient. Don't forget to
   check that it still passes the test.

Convergence of GMRES
--------------------

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454198706>`_.

The algorithm presented as pseudocode is the way to implement GMRES
efficiently. However, we can make an alternative formulation
of GMRES using matrix polynomials.

We know that `x_n\in \mathrm{span}(K_n)`, so we can write

   .. math::

      x_n = c_0b + c_1Ab + c_2A^2b + \ldots + c_{n-1}A^{n-1}b
      = p'(A)b,

where

   .. math::

      p'(z) = c_0 + c_1z + c_2z^2 + \ldots + \ldots c_{n-1}z^{n-1} \implies
      p'(A) = c_0I + c_1A + c_2A^2 + \ldots + c_{n-1}A^{n-1}.

Here we have introduced the idea of a matrix polynomial, where the
kth power of `z` is replaced by the kth power of `A`.

The residual becomes

   .. math::

      r_n = b - Ax_n = b - Ap'(A)b = (I - Ap'(A))b
      = p(A)b,

where `p(z) = 1 - zp'(z)`. Thus, the residual is a matrix polynomial
`p` of `A` applied to `b`, where `p\in \mathcal{P}_n`, and

   .. math::

      \mathcal{P}_n = \{\mbox{degree }\leq n\mbox{ polynomials with }
      p(0)=1\}.

Hence, we can recast iteration `n` of GMRES as a polynomial
optimisation problem: find `p_n\in \mathcal{P}_n` such that
`\|p_n(A)b\|` is minimised.  We have

   .. math::

      \|r_n\|  = \|p_n(A)b\| \leq \|p_n(A)\|\|b\|
      \implies \frac{\|r_n\|}{\|b\|} \leq \|p_n(A)\|.

Assuming that `A` is diagonalisable, `A=V\Lambda V^{-1}`, then
`A^s=V\Lambda^sV^{-1}`, and

   .. math::

      \|p_n(A)\| = \|Vp_n(\Lambda^s)V^{-1}\|
      \leq \underbrace{\|V\|\|V^{-1}\|}_{=\kappa(V)}
      \|p_n\|_{\Lambda(A)},

where `\Lambda(A)` is the set of eigenvalues of `A`, and

   .. math::

      \|p\|_{\Lambda(A)} = \sup_{x\in \Lambda(A)}\|p(x)\|.

Hence we see that GMRES will converge quickly if `V` is
well-conditioned, and `p(x)` is small for all `x\in \Lambda(A)`.  This
latter condition is not trivial due to the `p(0)=1` requirement. One
way it can happen is if `A` has all eigenvalues clustered in a small
number of groups. Then we can find a low degree polynomial that passes
through 1 at `x=0`, and 0 near each of the clusters. Then GMRES will
essentially converge in a small number of iterations (equal to the
degree of the polynomial). There are problems if the eigenvalues are
scattered over a wide region of the complex plane: we need a very
high degree polynomial to make `p(x)` small at all the eigenvalues and
hence we need a very large number of iterations.

.. proof:exercise::

   Investigate the convergence of the matrices provided by the
   functions :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.get_AA100`,
   :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.get_BB100`, and
   :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.get_CC100`, by looking at the residual
   after each iteration (which should be provided by
   :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.GMRES` as specified in the docstring).
   What do you observe? What is it about the three matrices that
   causes this different behaviour?

Preconditioning
---------------

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454218547>`_.

This final topic has been a strong focus of computational linear algebra
over the last 30 years. Typically, the matrices that we want to solve
do not have eigenvalues clustered in a small number of groups, and so
GMRES is slow. The solution (and the challenge) is to find a matrix
`M` such that `Mx = y` is cheap to solve (diagonal, or triangular, or
something else) and such that `M^{-1}A` *does* have eigenvalues clustered
in a small number of groups (e.g. `M` is a good approximation of `A`, so
that `M^{-1}A\approx I` which has eigenvalues all equal to 1). We call
`M` the preconditioning matrix, and the idea is to apply GMRES to
the (left) preconditioned system

   .. math::

      M^{-1}Ax = M^{-1}b.

GMRES on this preconditioned system is equivalent to the following algorithm,
called preconditioned GMRES.

* SOLVE `M\tilde{b}=b`.
* `q_1 \gets \tilde{b}/\|\tilde{b}\|`
* FOR `n=1,2,\dots`

  * SOLVE `Mv = Aq_n`
  * FOR `j=1` TO `n`

    * `h_{jn}=q_j^*v`
    * `v = v - h_{jn}q_j`
  * END FOR
  * `h_{n+1,n} \gets \|v\|`
  * `q_{n+1}`\gets v/\|v\|`
  * FIND `y` TO MINIMIZE `\|\tilde{H}_ny - \|\tilde{b}\|e_1\|`
  * `x_n \gets \hat{Q}_ny`
  * CHECK IF `\mathcal{R}_n <` TOL
* END FOR

.. proof:exercise::

   Show that this algorithm is equivalent to GMRES applied to the
   preconditioned system.
  
The art and science of finding preconditioning matrices `M` (or
matrix-free procedures for solving `Mx=y`) for specific problems
arising in data science, engineering, physics, biology etc. can
involve ideas from linear algebra, functional analysis, asymptotics,
physics, etc., and represents a major activity in scientific computing
today.

Commit message:

fixing the one loop thing.

doc/source/L6_krylov.rst, after:

.. default-role:: math

Iterative Krylov methods for `Ax=b`
===================================

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454126320>`_.

In the previous section we saw how iterative methods are necessary
(but can also be fast) for eigenvalue problems `Ax=\lambda x`.
Iterative methods can also be useful for solving linear systems
`Ax=b`, generating a sequence of vectors `x^k` that converge to the
solution. We shall examine Krylov subspace methods, where each
iteration mainly involves a matrix-vector multiplication. For dense
matrices, matrix-vector multiplication costs `\mathcal{O}(m^2)`, but
often (e.g. numerical solution of PDEs, graph problems, etc.)  `A` is
sparse (i.e. has zeros almost everywhere) and the matrix-vector
multiplication costs `\mathcal{O}(m)`. The goal is then to find a
method where only a few iterations are necessary before the error is
very small, so that the solver has total cost `\mathcal{O}(mN)` where
`N` is the total number of iterations, hopefully small.

Since we only need the result of a matrix-vector multiplication, it is
even possible to solve a linear system without storing `A`
explicitly. Instead one can just provide a subroutine that implements
matrix-vector multiplication in some way; this is called a
"matrix-free" implementation.

Krylov subspace methods
-----------------------

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454126582>`_.

In this section we will introduce Krylov subspace methods for solving
`Ax=b` (we will not specialise to real or symmetric matrices
here). The idea is to approximate the solution using the basis

.. math::

   (b, Ab, A^2b, A^3b, \ldots, A^kb)

whose span is called a Krylov subspace. After each iteration the
Krylov subspace grows by one dimension. As we have already seen from
studying power iteration, the later elements in this sequence will get
very parallel (they will all be approximating the eigenvector with
largest magnitude of eigenvalue). Hence, we once again need to resort
to orthogonalising the basis. We could simply take the QR
factorisation of this basis, but the Arnoldi iteration coming up
next also provides a neat way to solve the equation when projected
onto the Krylov subspace.

Arnoldi iteration
-----------------

The key to Krylov subspace methods turns out to be the transformation
of `A` to an upper Hessenberg matrix by orthogonal similarity
transforms, so that `A=QHQ^*`. We have already looked at using
Householder transformations to do this in the previous section.
The Householder technique is not so suitable for large dimensional
problems, so instead we look at a way of proceeding column by
column, just like the Gram-Schmidt method does for finding
`QR` factorisations.

We do this by rewriting `AQ=QH`. The idea is that at iteration `n` we
only look at the first `n` columns of `Q`, which we
call `\hat{Q}_n`. When `m` is large, this is a significant saving:
`mn \ll m^2`.
To execute the iteration, it turns out that
we should look at the `(n+1)\times n` upper left-hand section of `H`,
i.e.

   .. math::

      \tilde{H}_n = \begin{pmatrix}
      h_{11} & \ldots & h_{1n} \\
      h_{21} & \ddots & \vdots \\
      0 & \ddots & h_{nn} \\
      0 & 0 & h_{n+1,n} \\
      \end{pmatrix}

Then, `A\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n`.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454127181>`_.

Using the column space interpretation of matrix-matrix multiplication,
we see that the `n`-th column is

   .. math::

      Aq_n = h_{1n}q_1 + h_{2n}q_n + \ldots h_{n,n}q_n + h_{n+1,n}q_{n+1}.

This formula shows us how to construct the non-zero entries of the
nth column of `H`; this defines the Arnoldi algorithm which we
provide as pseudo-code below.

* `q_1\gets b/\|b\|`
* FOR `n=1,2,\ldots`

  * `v\gets Aq_n`
  * FOR `j=1` TO `n`

    * `h_{jn}\gets q_j^*v`
    * `v \gets v - h_{jn}q_j`
  * END FOR
  * `h_{n+1,n} \gets \|v\|`
  * `q_{n+1} \gets v/\|v\|`
* END FOR

.. proof:exercise::

   The :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.arnoldi` function has been left
   unimplemented. It should implement the Arnoldi algorithm using
   Numpy array operations where possible, and return the `Q` and `H`
   matrices after the requested number of iterations is complete.
   What is the minimal number of Python for loops possible?

   The test
   script ``test_exercises10.py`` in the ``test`` directory will test
   this function.
  
If we were to form the QR factorisation of the `m\times n` Krylov
matrix

   .. math::

      K_n = \begin{pmatrix}
      b & Ab & \ldots & A^{n_1}b \\
      \end{pmatrix}

then we would get `Q=Q_n`. Importantly, in the Arnoldi iteration, we
never form `K_n` or `R_n` explicitly, since these are very
ill-conditioned and not useful numerically.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454136990>`_.
   
But what is the use of the `\tilde{H}_n` matrix? Applying
`\hat{Q}_n^*` to `A\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n` gives

   .. math::

      \hat{Q}_n^*A\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_n^*\hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n,

      = \begin{pmatrix}
      1 & 0 & \ldots & 0 & 0 \\
      0 & \ddots & \ddots & \vdots & \vdots \\
      \vdots & \ddots & \ddots & \vdots & \vdots \\
      0 & \ldots & \ldots & 1 & 0 \\ 
      \end{pmatrix}
      \tilde{H}_n
      = H_n,

where `H_n` is the `n\times n` top left-hand corner of `H`.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454171516>`_.

The intrepretation of this is that `H_n` is the orthogonal projection
of `A` onto the Krylov subspace `\mathrm{span}(K_n)`. To see this, take any vector `v`,
and project `Av` onto the the Krylov subspace `\mathrm{span}(K_n)`.

   .. math::

      PAv = \hat{Q}_n\hat{Q}_n^*v.

Then, changing basis to the orthogonal basis gives

   .. math::

      \hat{Q}_n^*(\hat{Q}_n\hat{Q}_n^*A)\hat{Q}_n = \hat{Q}_n^*A\hat{Q}_n
      = H_n.

GMRES
-----

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454171559>`_.

The Generalised Minimum Residual method (GMRES), due to Saad (1986),
exploits these properties of the Arnoldi iteration. The idea is
that we build up the orthogonal basis for the Krylov subspaces
one by one, and at each iteration we solve the projection of
`Ax=b` onto the Krylov basis as a least squares problem, until
the residual `\|Ax-b\|` is below some desired tolerance.

To avoid the numerical instabilities that would come from using the
basis `(b,Ab,A^2b,\ldots)`, we use the Arnoldi iteration to build an
orthonormal basis, and seek approximate solutions of the form `x_n =
\hat{Q}_ny` for `y\in\mathbb{C}^n`. We then seek the value of `y`
that minimises the residual

   .. math::

      \mathcal{R}_n = \|AQ_ny - b\|.

This explains the Minimum Residual part of the name. We also see from
this definition that the residual cannot increase with iterations,
because it only increases the subspace where we seek a solution.

This problem can be simplified further by using `AQ_n = Q_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n`,
so

   .. math::

      \mathcal{R}_n = \|\hat{Q}_{n+1}\tilde{H}_n y - b\|.

Remembering that `b=\|b\|q_1`, we see that the entire residual is in
the column space of `\hat{Q}_{n+1}`, and hence we can invert
on the column space using `\hat{Q}_{n+1}^*` which does not change
the norm of the residual due to the orthonormality.

   .. math::

      \mathcal{R}_n = \|\tilde{H}_n y - \hat{Q}_{n+1}^*b\|
      = \|\tilde{H}_n y - e_1\|b\|\|.

Finding `y` to minimise `\mathcal{R}_n` requires the solution of a
least squares problem, which can be computed via QR factorisation
as we saw much earlier in the course.

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454171921>`_.

We are now in position to present the GMRES algorithm as pseudo-code.

* `q_1 \gets b/\|b\|`
* FOR `n=1,2,\dots`

  * APPLY STEP `n` OF ARNOLDI
  * FIND `y` TO MINIMIZE `\|\tilde{H}_ny - \|b\|e_1\|`
  * `x_n \gets \hat{Q}_ny`
  * CHECK IF `\mathcal{R}_n <` TOL
* END FOR

.. proof:exercise::

   The :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.GMRES` function has been left
   unimplemented. It should implement the basic GMRES algorithm above,
   using one loop over the iteration count. You can paste code from
   your :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.arnoldi` implementation, and you
   should use your least squares code to solve the least squares
   problem.  The test script ``test_exercises10.py`` in the ``test``
   directory will test this function.

.. proof:exercise::

   The least squares problem in GMRES requires the QR factorisation of
   `H_k`. It is wasteful to rebuild this from scratch given that we
   just computed the QR factorisation of `H_{k-1}`. Modify your code
   so that it recycles the QR factorisation, applying just one extra
   Householder rotation per GMRES iteration. Don't forget to check
   that it still passes the test.

.. hint::

   Don't get confused by the two Q matrices involved in GMRES! There
   is the Q matrix for the Arnoldi iteration, and the Q matrix for
   the least squares problem. These are not the same.

.. proof:exercise::

   We can also make GMRES more efficient by exploiting the upper
   Hessenberg structure, since we only have one non-zero value below
   the diagonal in each column. Instead of using a Householder
   transformation, we can use a Givens rotation, which only alters
   two rows (the row corresponding to the diagonal, and the row
   below). The Givens rotation simply replaces these two rows
   (call them `r_k` and `r_{k+1}`) by

      .. math::

	 \hat{r}_k = \cos(\theta) r_k + \sin(\theta) r_{k+1},

	 \hat{r}_{k+1} = -\sin(\theta) r_k + \cos(\theta) r_{k+1}.

   where the angle `\theta` is chosen so that `\hat{r}_{k+1,k}=0`.
   This is cheaper, because we only update two rows, but still
   corresponds to a unitary transformation. (Note that a slightly more
   general formula is required for complex matrices, but the tests
   have been set up for real matrices only.) Modify your code so it
   uses Givens rotations to make it more efficient. Don't forget to
   check that it still passes the test.

Convergence of GMRES
--------------------

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454198706>`_.

The algorithm presented as pseudocode is the way to implement GMRES
efficiently. However, we can make an alternative formulation
of GMRES using matrix polynomials.

We know that `x_n\in \mathrm{span}(K_n)`, so we can write

   .. math::

      x_n = c_0b + c_1Ab + c_2A^2b + \ldots + c_{n-1}A^{n-1}b
      = p'(A)b,

where

   .. math::

      p'(z) = c_0 + c_1z + c_2z^2 + \ldots + \ldots c_{n-1}z^{n-1} \implies
      p'(A) = c_0I + c_1A + c_2A^2 + \ldots + c_{n-1}A^{n-1}.

Here we have introduced the idea of a matrix polynomial, where the
kth power of `z` is replaced by the kth power of `A`.

The residual becomes

   .. math::

      r_n = b - Ax_n = b - Ap'(A)b = (I - Ap'(A))b
      = p(A)b,

where `p(z) = 1 - zp'(z)`. Thus, the residual is a matrix polynomial
`p` of `A` applied to `b`, where `p\in \mathcal{P}_n`, and

   .. math::

      \mathcal{P}_n = \{\mbox{degree }\leq n\mbox{ polynomials with }
      p(0)=1\}.

Hence, we can recast iteration `n` of GMRES as a polynomial
optimisation problem: find `p_n\in \mathcal{P}_n` such that
`\|p_n(A)b\|` is minimised.  We have

   .. math::

      \|r_n\|  = \|p_n(A)b\| \leq \|p_n(A)\|\|b\|
      \implies \frac{\|r_n\|}{\|b\|} \leq \|p_n(A)\|.

Assuming that `A` is diagonalisable, `A=V\Lambda V^{-1}`, then
`A^s=V\Lambda^sV^{-1}`, and

   .. math::

      \|p_n(A)\| = \|Vp_n(\Lambda^s)V^{-1}\|
      \leq \underbrace{\|V\|\|V^{-1}\|}_{=\kappa(V)}
      \|p_n\|_{\Lambda(A)},

where `\Lambda(A)` is the set of eigenvalues of `A`, and

   .. math::

      \|p\|_{\Lambda(A)} = \sup_{x\in \Lambda(A)}\|p(x)\|.

Hence we see that GMRES will converge quickly if `V` is
well-conditioned, and `p(x)` is small for all `x\in \Lambda(A)`.  This
latter condition is not trivial due to the `p(0)=1` requirement. One
way it can happen is if `A` has all eigenvalues clustered in a small
number of groups. Then we can find a low degree polynomial that passes
through 1 at `x=0`, and 0 near each of the clusters. Then GMRES will
essentially converge in a small number of iterations (equal to the
degree of the polynomial). There are problems if the eigenvalues are
scattered over a wide region of the complex plane: we need a very
high degree polynomial to make `p(x)` small at all the eigenvalues and
hence we need a very large number of iterations.

.. proof:exercise::

   Investigate the convergence of the matrices provided by the
   functions :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.get_AA100`,
   :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.get_BB100`, and
   :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.get_CC100`, by looking at the residual
   after each iteration (which should be provided by
   :func:`cla_utils.exercises10.GMRES` as specified in the docstring).
   What do you observe? What is it about the three matrices that
   causes this different behaviour?

Preconditioning
---------------

.. hint::
   
   A video recording for this material is available `here
   <https://player.vimeo.com/video/454218547>`_.

This final topic has been a strong focus of computational linear algebra
over the last 30 years. Typically, the matrices that we want to solve
do not have eigenvalues clustered in a small number of groups, and so
GMRES is slow. The solution (and the challenge) is to find a matrix
`M` such that `Mx = y` is cheap to solve (diagonal, or triangular, or
something else) and such that `M^{-1}A` *does* have eigenvalues clustered
in a small number of groups (e.g. `M` is a good approximation of `A`, so
that `M^{-1}A\approx I` which has eigenvalues all equal to 1). We call
`M` the preconditioning matrix, and the idea is to apply GMRES to
the (left) preconditioned system

   .. math::

      M^{-1}Ax = M^{-1}b.

GMRES on this preconditioned system is equivalent to the following algorithm,
called preconditioned GMRES.

* SOLVE `M\tilde{b}=b`.
* `q_1 \gets \tilde{b}/\|\tilde{b}\|`
* FOR `n=1,2,\dots`

  * SOLVE `Mv = Aq_n`
  * FOR `j=1` TO `n`

    * `h_{jn}=q_j^*v`
    * `v = v - h_{jn}q_j`
  * END FOR
  * `h_{n+1,n} \gets \|v\|`
  * `q_{n+1}`\gets v/\|v\|`
  * FIND `y` TO MINIMIZE `\|\tilde{H}_ny - \|\tilde{b}\|e_1\|`
  * `x_n \gets \hat{Q}_ny`
  * CHECK IF `\mathcal{R}_n <` TOL
* END FOR

.. proof:exercise::

   Show that this algorithm is equivalent to GMRES applied to the
   preconditioned system.
  
The art and science of finding preconditioning matrices `M` (or
matrix-free procedures for solving `Mx=y`) for specific problems
arising in data science, engineering, physics, biology etc. can
involve ideas from linear algebra, functional analysis, asymptotics,
physics, etc., and represents a major activity in scientific computing
today.
